+++
name = "Radicle"
blurb = "An incredibly cool forge"
date = "2026-06-06"
article= "radicle"
tags = ["dev"]
+++

> [!NOTE]  
> **This article is a <u>WIP</u>**. I will update this as I get more comfortable
> with Radicle.

> [!WARNING]  
> I am a total n00b with Radicle and have not interacted with the community.
> Should something here be inaccurate, [reach out](/contact) and I'll correct
> it.

> [!WARNING]  
> I use [jujutsu](https://github.com/jj-vcs/jj) as my VCS tool of choice. You
> can find equivalent git commands in the official documentation-- but you can
> probably guess the equivalent command regardless.

I have moved [git.hachha.dev](https://radicle.network/nodes/git.hocko.tech) from
[Gitea](https://about.gitea.com/) to [Radicle](https://radicle.dev/). I've been
following radicle for a couple of years now, but I figured it was finally time
to actually follow through and thoroughly investigate it.

At its core, Radicle is a decentralized git forge. So GitHub, but without
Microsoft. Since it isn't centralized, the risk of having useful software taken
down by overeager legal teams should be far lower. Radicle still supports
private repos. It uses a custom P2P protocol based off of Secure Scuttlebutt
(SSB).

Radicle has several detailed official guides online, but I think it is useful to
document the workflows I use.

## Core Concepts

A few ideas are necessary to understand at the get-go to reduce the cognitive
overhead of setting up your "account".

- _Radicle_ is a _decentralized git forge_.
  - Radicle supports PRs (==patch== requests), issues, and other collaboration
    which can be done with just the CLI, or with desktop/web interfaces.
  - Radicle nodes form a distributed network that ensures a repo is not on a
    single server.
  - Radicle is fairly viable but features that may be necessary for your
    adoption may not yet be implemented.
- Every device that connects to the Radicle network must have a running
  ==node==.
  - Nodes are essentially independent accounts and are **not _currently_
    shareable across devices**, even by the same user.
  - Nodes are identified by their ==did== (decentralized identifier).
- The Radicle network is decentralized but there are still repository "owners"
  (==delegates==).
  - Delegates must agree on changes according to the associated policy.
  - Since nodes are not (yet) cross-device, you'll need to be a delegate from
    each machine that you work from.
- A repo is identified by its ==RID==.
- TODO - seeders
- TODO - configuration

## Local Node: Setting up Radicle

- Establish your node: `rad auth`
  - A running SSH Agent is necessary
- Start the node: `rad node start`
- See paths and DID: `rad self`
- Check node status: `rad node status`
  - The Node ID is your did (e.g.,
    `z6MksVwSb9SCKp5srKn8qK46wDPPTR7WzScnyd4RJRjTVQeF`)
- View the config: `rad config edit`

## Initializing Your Repo

- Initialize the repo: `rad init`
  - This walks you through high-level configuration
- View the repo RID: `rad .`

## Seed Nodes: Setting up Your Server

My home server is my seed node.

> [!TIP]  
> Official documentation recommends using another user:
>
> ```shell
> sudo groupadd --system seed
> sudo useradd --system --gid seed --create-home seed
> ```

You'll initialize your seed node just like your workstation (`rad auth`). After
initializing, you'll want to edit your config `rad config edit`.

- Add a listen address: `"listen": ["0.0.0.0:8776"]`
- Update external addresses:
  `"externalAddressses": ["https://git.you.dev:8776"]`
- Update the `web` section

Run the HTTP server to support your site on `radicle.network` (e.g.,
[`git.hocko.tech`](https://radicle.network/nodes/git.hocko.tech)).

- Run the HTTP server: `rad-httpd --list 0.0.0.0:8020`

## Forging: Working with PRs

### Add Maintainers (Delegates)

Even if you don't work with other people, you should probably make your seed
node a "maintainer". This ensures that you can add a new workstation as a
maintainer even if something were to happen to your current workstation.

- Add delegate:
  `rad id update --title "<Your reason>" --delegate did:key:<seed-did>`

Or, if you just want to provide access to _view_ a private repo:

- Add viewer: `rad id update --title "<Your reason>" --allow did:key:<seed-did>`

After adding your seed node as a collaborator, you'll want to actually seed the
node so you won't risk it disappearing when your laptop is stolen.

- On the seed node: `rad seed rad:<repo-rid> --from <workstation-did>`
- Optionally clone the repo: `rad clone <repo-rid>`
- Check seed status: `rad ls -a`

### Pushing Changes

If your repo only requires a single delegate to make changes (default), you can
update trunk by simple pushing to that rad (e.g.,
`jj git push -b main --remote rad`, may require a
`jj bookmark track main --remote=rad` first).

### Updating

...

## Useful Commands

- Edit configuration: `rad config edit`
  - Add a route to your peers in `node.connect` (e.g.,
    `z6MktHeiab3jTcHABTg4RkbfWaqu8adPPZw7bEiVyAkNPM1B@git.hocko.tech:8776`)
- Initialize repo: `rad init`
  - Check for ==DID== with `rad .`
- Add delegate: `rad id update --title "<desc>" --allow did:key:<did>`
  - Seed from delegate (e.g., home server): `rad seed rad:<repo> --from <did>`
- Push changes:
  - ...
- TODO: `rad follow <did>`
