Gamertags have always fascinated me. They're a form of identity with high
freedom and low consequences. They're an answer to the question "what if people
could pick their own names?" While some platforms rely on SSO token or emails as
the primary identifier for a user, many still require unique usernames.

Many sources credit Xbox for the creation of the modern gamertag. Regardless of
their origin

TODO

Everybody had that childhood friend, who they've only ever met online, that
suddenly vanished one day, never to log in again.

## Catman

When I was first learning to program in college, I started working on a personal
project to generate images from ascii art. I decided to test it out on some art
I had used in high school for a game project, converting it to ascii and
adjusting the palette. I popped it into
[pyllusrate](https://github.com/HarrisonHall/pyllustrate) and was so proud of
the result it had been my profile ever since. _(Yes, that's a cat...)_

![catman](/media/catman.png)

Still, I like variation, so over the years I've created alternatives. I'm lazy,
so the holiday variants tend to overstay their welcome. Sometimes my irl style
leaks through.

<div style="display:flex;width:100%;max-width:400px;margin:0px;">
  <img src="/blog/gamertags/catman/catman_ballcap.png" style="width:50%;" />
  <img src="/blog/gamertags/catman/catman_headband.png" style="width:50%;" />
</div>
<div style="display:flex;width:100%;max-width:400px;margin:0px;margin-bottom:1em;">
  <img src="/blog/gamertags/catman/catman_shades.png" style="width:50%;" />
  <img src="/blog/gamertags/catman/catman_angry.png" style="width:50%" />
</div>

## History

## hachha

My own gamertag has changed over the years. It's evolved from
`hocko`->`HaChHa`->`hachha` in a way that makes the tag a bit more personal, for
better or worse. It's always fun watching someone struggle to figure out to get
my attention for a callout; `hachha` is simply my initials and has no official
pronunciation (I prefer the "ha cha" onomatopoeia). For more anonymous settings,
I prefer other alternative tags, but for most platforms "hachha" is fine.

Gamertags are a fun way of expressing yourself and often reveal a bit about the
psyche of the user.
